In the digital age, data plays a huge role in
our everyday lives.
It's present in lots of obvious ways when
we're shopping online, for example, and have
to type in our name and address.
But data collection can also be less
visible.
Take data brokers, for example.
You've probably never heard of them, but
these businesses specialize in creating
in-depth profiles of individuals for
advertisers.
A single profile might draw on up to 1500
data points.
This can include a person's sexuality,
browsing history, political affiliation, and
even medical records.
One US based data broker, axiom, claims to
have files on 10% of the world's population.
It's not just businesses, of course.
In 2013, Edward Snowden uncovered a vast
regime of mass government surveillance
programs, opening a global conversation
which is still unfolding today.
In this video, we'll take a closer look at
this debate, focusing on the related but
distinct concepts of privacy and data
protection.
By the end, you should have a clear idea of
how these issues differ and overlap, how both
are affected by the digital age, and how you
can engage with companies and governments to
protect and strengthen these rights.
So what are we talking about when we say
privacy and data protection?
Let's take privacy first.
Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights treats privacy as a distinct
human right.
It says that no one shall be subjected to
arbitrary interference with his privacy,
family, home, or correspondence.
Everyone has the right to the protection of
the law against such interference or attacks.
This is simple enough.
Agreeing on what privacy actually means here
has proved harder.
Depending on the context, it can mean the
right to freedom of thought and conscience,
the right to be left alone, the right to
control one's own body, the right to protect
your reputation, the right to a family life,
or the right to a sexuality of your own
definition. There are other ambiguities.
In legal terms, privacy isn't an absolute
right.
This means it can be restricted for certain
reasons.
For example, to protect national security or
public safety, or if it conflicts with other
rights like the right to free expression.
An example could be a public figure invoking
privacy to avoid disclosing their financial
records. And what about data protection?
Contrary to popular belief, it is not the
same thing as privacy.
Privacy is a broad concept, referring to the
conditions which enable a basic foundation of
human dignity and autonomy.
Data protection is more specific.
It's concerned with the ways third parties
handle the information they hold about us,
how it is collected, processed, shared,
stored and used.
In other words, privacy is the big picture
and data protection is one corner of it.
Like privacy, data protection is also
subject to limits.
For example, when a warrant is obtained
allowing law enforcement to access the phone
records of a suspect.
And while data protection is in some ways
more clearly defined than privacy, how it is
applied legally can still vary greatly
depending on which country you're in.
The digital age has created new ways to
collect, access, analyse and use data, often
across multiple borders and jurisdictions.
Unsurprisingly, this poses challenges for
human rights.
One challenge relates to the way companies
use our data.
The internet's business model depends on
people sharing their personal data in
exchange for access to content, services and
social media platforms.
While you might not pay anything upfront to
go on Facebook, they still make money from
you by selling your personal information to
advertisers by clicking Agree to Terms of
Service. Users technically consent to this
model, but in practice virtually no one
actually reads them.
This is a problem because no one knows what
they're really signing up to, which creates
opportunities for misuse.
Another challenge relates to the collection
of personal data by governments.
Technological developments now enable
governments to monitor our conversations,
transactions and the location we visit.
In some countries, including Russia, Brazil,
Australia and South Korea, companies are
legally required to store this data locally
for long periods of time, making it easier
for governments to get information on their
citizens.
These measures are often introduced in the
name of fighting cybercrime and terrorism,
but without adequate protections.
This data can easily be abused to target
dissidents and activists, undermining freedom
of expression and the rights to association
and assembly.
And these are just the technologies we have
now.
Emerging technologies like the Internet of
Things, wearables and artificial intelligence
are likely to pose new challenges to human
rights.
As human rights defenders, we need to be
prepared for these.
There are many bodies and forums where
privacy and data protection issues are
discussed and defined.
National and regional courts have a crucial
role here.
The European Court of Human Rights, for
example, has imposed limits on stop and
search practices by the police and on the
amount of time data can be legally retained.
At the national level, it's common to find a
specific public body responsible for privacy
and data protection.
This can be a specialist post or an
ombudsman, but the extent to which privacy is
defined and protected varies greatly between
different jurisdictions.
For example, there is no clear right to
privacy in the African Charter on Human and
Peoples Rights.
However, there are mechanisms at the
international level following a UN resolution
on the right to privacy in the digital age,
the Human Rights Council has established a
new Special Rapporteur for privacy and
various internet policy forums like the
Internet Governance Forum, the Council of
Europe, the organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development and conferences
like Hope and Sci Fi also contribute to
shaping the scope of privacy in the digital
age.
And finally, we have companies.
The decisions of companies can also have a
huge impact on data protection and privacy
rights, for example, by building end to end
encryption into their software, as WhatsApp
did in early 2016.
Let's look at two examples of privacy and
data protection in the real world.
First, let's look at the Apple versus FBI
case.
After the 2016 terrorist attacks in the US
city of San Bernardino, the FBI asked Apple
for the information stored on the iPhone of
one of the suspects.
However, Apple's operating system is
encrypted and only accessible through a Pin
code. The FBI asked Apple to modify the
system to let them in.
Apple refused, opening a lively debate on
the right to privacy versus security needs.
The case was almost taken to court, but in
the end, the FBI found a vulnerability to
crack the phone.
In privacy terms, this was a legal setback.
If the case had gone to court, it could have
helped popularize the risks of weakening
encryption for society and establish what
constitutes a legitimate limitation on
privacy by the state.
Next, let's look at surveillance in Kenya.
In Kenya, a combination of invasive
surveillance measures and a lack of adequate
data protection facilitated a crackdown on
civil society in 2013, which was documented
by Peace Brigades International.
Many human rights defenders had their
offices raided, computers hacked and phones
tapped by the government.
One of the ways human rights defenders have
been fighting back is by pushing for the
ratification of Kenya's first data
protection law, long stalled in Parliament.
If implemented properly, this could limit
the worst excesses of state surveillance.
Kenya is by no means the only country to
bring in surveillance legislation justified
by security concerns, but this example is a
good demonstration of how seemingly abstract
restrictions on online privacy can have
physical consequences in the offline world.
So what can human rights defenders do to
protect and strengthen privacy and data
protection? An easy first step is taking
digital security measures yourself.
This can be as simple as using encryption
and anonymity tools and encouraging your
friends to do the same.
Human rights defenders can also advocate for
alternative digital business models, which
aren't based on the extraction and sale of
data.
Economic pressure on the existing model is
already growing.
For example, over the last few years, the
number of users using Adblock software
globally has exploded.
There is evidence that this is already
pushing companies to less invasive
advertising practices.
Engagement in debates at the national and
regional level is, of course, crucial.
Where privacy protections are weak, human
rights defenders need to actively advocate
for stronger ones, and even where they are
stronger, we need to make sure legislation is
keeping up with new technological
developments like the Internet of Things.
Ultimately, if we want things to change,
human rights defenders need to make these
issues accessible and relatable by being
more creative about the way we talk about
them. When people see how data protection
and privacy affects them on a day to day
basis, they may be more inclined to engage
with these concepts.
In the next video, we'll be taking a closer
look at freedom of expression, association,
and peaceful assembly.